# Latest Ref

## ðŸ“ Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/01.md`

## Background

**One liner:** The Latest Ref Pattern allows you to access the latest value of a
prop, state, or callback without needing to list it in a dependency array.

When React introduced hooks it did more than give us an excellent primitive with
super abstractability powers. It also changed an important default that results
in fewer bugs deployed to production. They changed how you access the latest
value of state and props.

Before, you would access these values via `this.state` and `this.props` meaning
that you'd always get the latest value of state or props in your functions.
Let's explore an example:

```tsx
class PokemonFeeder extends React.Component {
  state = {selectedPokemonFood: null}
  feedPokemon = async () => {
    const canEat = await this.props.pokemon.canEat(
      this.state.selectedPokemonFood,
    )
    if (canEat) {
      this.props.pokemon.eat(this.state.selectedPokemonFood)
    }
  }
  render() {
    return (
      <div>
        <PokemonFoodChooser
          onSelection={selectedPokemonFood =>
            this.setState({selectedPokemonFood})
          }
        />
        <button onClick={this.feedPokemon}>
          Feed {this.props.pokemon.name}
        </button>
      </div>
    )
  }
}
```

Think about that `feedPokemon` function for a moment... What kinds of bugs can
you spot with this implementation? Let me ask you a question. What would happen
if the `pokemon.canEat` function took a couple seconds to resolve? What could
the user do to cause a problem? If the user changed the `selectedPokemonFood`
what could happen? Yeah! You could check whether your pidgey can eat worms but
then actually feed it grass! Or what if while we're checking whether charizard
can eat some candy the props changed now we're witholding the candy from a
hungry pikachu! ðŸ˜¢

Can you imagine how we could side-step these issues? It's simple actually:

```ts
class PokemonFeeder extends React.Component {
  // ...
  feedPokemon = async () => {
    const {pokemon} = this.props
    const {selectedPokemonFood} = this.state
    const canEat = await pokemon.canEat(selectedPokemonFood)
    if (canEat) {
      pokemon.eat(selectedPokemonFood)
    }
  }
  // ...
}
```

The default led to bugs that were hard to catch because they often didn't happen
locally, but if there's one thing I know it's that everything that can happen,
users will make happen eventually ðŸ˜… And unfortunately these kinds of bugs are
also difficult to reproduce. So I made it a habit of doing this when I was
writing React class components back in the day and I was able to avoid this
problem altogether most of the time.

As mentioned earlier, React hooks flipped this default on its head and now every
function references the closure-version of props and state values rather than
accessing the latest value off some component instance. So now the kinds of bugs
you experience will happen during your local development. You won't be able to
avoid them, so you'll ship fewer (at least, that's been my experience).

So let's rewrite the example above with hooks:

```tsx
function PokemonFeeder({pokemon}) {
  const [selectedPokemonFood, setSelectedPokemonFood] = React.useState(null)
  const feedPokemon = async () => {
    const canEat = await pokemon.canEat(selectedPokemonFood)
    if (canEat) {
      pokemon.eat(selectedPokemonFood)
    }
  }
  return (
    <div>
      <PokemonFoodChooser onSelection={food => setSelectedPokemonFood(food)} />
      <button onClick={feedPokemon}>Feed {pokemon.name}</button>
    </div>
  )
}
```

Alright, so that's the default (by that I mean it's the more natural and easier
way to write it). It avoids the bugs mentioned. But what if we _wanted_ the
behavior before? Could we make that work with hooks? Sure! We just need some way
to **ref**erence the latest version of a value. `useRef` to the rescue!

```tsx
function PokemonFeeder({pokemon}) {
  const [selectedPokemonFood, setSelectedPokemonFood] = React.useState(null)
  const latestPokemonRef = React.useRef(pokemon)
  const latestSelectedPokemonFoodRef = React.useRef(selectedPokemonFood)

  // why is the useEffect necessary? Because side-effects run in the function
  // body of your component can lead to some pretty confusing bugs. Just keep
  // your function body free of side-effects and you'll be better off.
  React.useEffect(() => {
    latestPokemonRef.current = pokemon
    latestSelectedPokemonFoodRef.current = selectedPokemonFood
    // Wondering why we have no dependency list? Do we really need it?
    // Not really... So we don't bother.
  })

  const feedPokemon = async () => {
    const canEat = await latestPokemonRef.current.canEat(
      latestSelectedPokemonFoodRef.current,
    )
    if (canEat) {
      latestPokemonRef.current.eat(latestSelectedPokemonFoodRef.current)
    }
  }
  return (
    <div>
      <PokemonFoodChooser onSelection={food => setSelectedPokemonFood(food)} />
      <button onClick={feedPokemon}>Feed {pokemon.name}</button>
    </div>
  )
}
```

We've successfully simulated the class version of our original component. The
`ref` + `useEffect` there is what makes up the latest ref pattern.

Now why is this a desireable pattern you might ask? In the example above it
looks like you'd never want to deal with those bugs we talked about right. Well
it turns out there are some situations where you really _do_ want the latest
version of the callback. Use cases vary, but one popular library that uses this
pattern heavily is [`react-query`](https://react-query.tanstack.com). They use
this for query and mutation functions/configuration. One reason this is so
useful is because it means they can call your callback in a `useEffect` without
referencing it in the dependency list. For example:

```tsx
function useExampleOne(callback) {
  React.useEffect(() => {
    callback()
  }, [callback]) // <-- have to include the callback in the dep array
}

function useExampleTwo(callback) {
  const latestCallbackRef = React.useRef(callback)
  React.useEffect(() => {
    latestCallbackRef.current = callback
  })

  React.useEffect(() => {
    latestCallbackRef.current()
  }, []) // <-- don't have to include the callback in the dep array
}
```

It's important that you understand the trade-offs here! Remember, when we do
this we're going back to the class component default. So just think about the
unexpected behavior's you'll get when you switch the default like this.

For more on this subject, read
[How React Uses Closures to Avoid Bugs](https://epicreact.dev/how-react-uses-closures-to-avoid-bugs).

**Real World Projects that use this pattern:**

- [react-query](https://react-query.tanstack.com)

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](http://advanced-react-patterns-next.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/01.tsx)
- [Final](http://advanced-react-patterns-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/01.tsx)

In our exercise, we are going to build a `useDebounce` function that isn't
working the way we want without the old default in place. `debounce` is a
pattern that's often used in user-input fields. For example, if you've got a
signup form where the user can select their username, you probably want to
validate for the user that the username is not taken. You want to do it when the
user's done typing but without requiring them to do anything to trigger the
validation. With a debounced function, you could say when the user stops typing
for 400ms you can trigger the validation. If they start typing again after only
350ms then you want to start over and wait again until the user pauses for
400ms.

In this exercise, the `debounce` function is already written. Even the
`useDebounce` hook is implemented for you. Your job is to implement the latest
ref pattern for it.

Our example here is a counter button that has a debounced increment function. We
want to make it so this works:

- The user clicks the button
- The user updates the step value
- The user clicks the button again
- The debounce timer completes
- The count value is incremented by the latest step value

Before continuing here, please familiarize yourself with the exercise and how
it's implemented... Got it? Great, let's continue.

Right now, you can play around with two different problems with the way our
exercise is implemented:

```ts
// option 1:
// ...
const increment = () => setCount(c => c + step)
const debouncedIncrement = useDebounce(increment, 3000)
// ...
```

The problem here is `useDebounce` list `increment` in the dependency list for
`useMemo`. For this reason, any time there's a state update, we create a _new_
debounced version of that function so the `timer` in that debounce function's
closure is different from the previous which means we don't cancel that timout.
Ultimate this is the bug our users experience:

- The user clicks the button
- The user updates the step value
- The user clicks the button again
- The first debounce timer completes
- The count value is incremented by the step value at the time the first click
  happened
- The second debounce timer completes
- The count value is incremented by the step value at the time the second click
  happened

This is not what we want at all! And the reason it's a problem is because we're
not memoizing the callback that's going into our `useMemo` dependency list.

So the alternative solution is we could change our `useDebounce` API to require
you pass a memoized callback:

```ts
// option 2:
// ...
const increment = React.useCallback(() => setCount(c => c + step), [step])
const debouncedIncrement = useDebounce(increment, 3000)
// ...
```

But again, this callback function will be updated when the `step` value changes
which means we'll get another instance of the `debouncedIncrement`. Dah! So the
user experience doesn't actually change with this adjustment _and_ we have a
less fun API. The latest ref pattern will give us a nice API and we'll avoid
this problem.

I've made the debounce value last `3000ms` to make it easier for you to observe
and test the behavior, but you can feel free to adjust that as you like. The
tests can also help you make sure you've got things working well.

## ðŸ¦‰ Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Patterns%20%F0%9F%A4%AF&e=01%3A%20Latest%20Ref&em=).
