# Composition and Layout Components

## ðŸ“ Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/02.md`

## Background

**One liner:** The Compositional and Layout Components Pattern helps to avoid
the prop drilling problem and enhances the reusability of your components.

ðŸ¦‰ If you're unfamiliar with the concept of "Prop Drilling" then please read
[this blog post](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/prop-drilling) before going
forward.

Let's skip to the end here. It's surprising what you can accomplish by passing
react elements rather than treating components as uncrossable boundaries. We'll
have a practical example in our exercise, so let me show you a quick and easy
contrived example to explain what we'll be doing here:

```tsx
function App() {
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0)
  const increment = () => setCount(c => c + 1)
  return <Child count={count} increment={increment} />
}

function Child({count, increment}: {count: number; increment: () => void}) {
  return (
    <div>
      <strong>
        I am a child and I don't actually use count or increment. My child does
        though so I have to accept those as props and forward them along.
      </strong>
      <GrandChild count={count} onIncrementClick={increment} />
    </div>
  )
}

function GrandChild({
  count,
  onIncrementClick,
}: {
  count: number
  onIncrementClick: () => void
}) {
  return (
    <div>
      <small>I am a grand child and I just pass things off to a button</small>
      <button onClick={onIncrementClick}>{count}</button>
    </div>
  )
}
```

This prop drilling stuff is one of the reasons so many people have jumped onto
state manager solutions, whether it be libraries or React context. However, if
we restructure things a bit, we'll notice that things get quite a bit easier
without losing the flexibility we're hoping for.

```tsx
function App() {
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0)
  const increment = () => setCount(c => c + 1)
  return (
    <Child
      grandChild={
        <GrandChild
          button={<button onClick={onIncrementClick}>{count}</button>}
        />
      }
    />
  )
}

function Child({grandChild}: {grandChild: React.ReactElement}) {
  return (
    <div>
      <strong>
        I am a child and I don't actually use count or increment. My child does
        though so I have to accept those as props and forward them along.
      </strong>
      {grandChild}
    </div>
  )
}

function GrandChild({button}: {button: React.ReactElement}) {
  return (
    <div>
      <small>I am a grand child and I just pass things off to a button</small>
      {button}
    </div>
  )
}
```

Now, clearly you can take this too far (our contrived example above probably
does), but the point is that by structuring things a little differently, you can
keep the components that don't care about state free of the plumming needed to
make it work. If we decided we needed to manage some more state in the App and
that was needed in the button then we could update only the app for that.

This style of composition has helped me reduce the amount of components and
files I touch (break?) when I need to make a change and it's also made my
abstractions much easier (imagine if we wanted to reuse the `Child` from above
but needed to customize the `grandChild`. Much easier when we're just accepting
a prop for it).

When we structure our components to only really deal with props it actually
cares about, then it becomes more of a "layout" component. A component
responsible for laying out the react elements it accepts as props. If you're
familiar with Vue, this concept is similar to the concept of scoped slots.

Read more abou this in my blog post:
[One React mistake that's slowing you down](https://epicreact.dev/one-react-mistake-thats-slowing-you-down)

**Real World Projects that use this pattern:**

- [kentcdodds.com](https://kentcdodds.com) (for the hero component you see at
  the top of most pages)

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](http://advanced-react-patterns-next.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/02.tsx)
- [Final](http://advanced-react-patterns-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.tsx)

In this exercise we've got a simple user interface with several components
necessitating passing state and updaters around. We're going to restructure
things so we pass react elements instead of state and updaters. We might be
going a _tiny_ bit overboard, but the goal is for this to be instructive for
you.

By the time you're done, the whole UI should look and function exactly as
before, but you'll get a sense for how to use this pattern. The tests will be
there just for you to verify you haven't broken anything that should be working
if you want to use them.

## ðŸ¦‰ Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Patterns%20%F0%9F%A4%AF&e=02%3A%20Composition%20and%20Layout%20Components&em=).
