# State Initializer

## ðŸ“ Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/05.md`

## Background

**One liner:** The state initializer pattern allows you to expose an API to
users to be able to reset your component to it's original state without having
to completely unmount and remount the component.

This is similar to `defaultValue` in HTML. Sometimes the consumer of your hook
or component wants to initialize the value of your state. The state initializer
pattern allows you to do that.

Take this for example:

```tsx
function Counter() {
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0)
  const increment = () => setCount(c => c + 1)
  const reset = () => setCount(0)
  return (
    <div>
      <button onClick={increment}>{count}</button>
      <button onClick={reset}>Reset</button>
    </div>
  )
}
```

So our component has a way to initialize it's state (to `0`) and it also
supports a way to reset the state to that initial value.

So what this pattern is for is to allow outside users of your component to
control that initial state value. For example. If someone wanted to start the
count off as `1` they might want to do this:

```tsx
<Counter initialCount={1} />
```

To support that we'd need to do this:

```tsx
function Counter({initialCount = 0}: {initialCount?: number}) {
  //              ^^^ accept the prop with a default value so it's optional
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(initialCount) // <-- pass it to your state
  const increment = () => setCount(c => c + 1)
  const reset = () => setCount(initialCount) // <-- pass that initialCount value to the reset function
  return (
    <div>
      <button onClick={increment}>{count}</button>
      <button onClick={reset}>Reset</button>
    </div>
  )
}
```

And that's basically it for the pattern. It's not _quite_ perfect, but we'll
perfect it in our extra credit.

One other thing I want to call out is you can actually reset a component pretty
easily without any API at all. It's a built-in React API for all components: the
`key` prop. Simply provide a `key` and set that `key` prop to a new value any
time you want to re-initialize the component. This will unmount and remount the
component brand new. But there are situations where this is not what you want.
When you're finished with this exercise, compare your version with a version of
this component that uses the `key` method in
[`src/examples/resetting-via-key-prop.tsx`](http://localhost:3000/isolated/examples/resetting-via-key-prop.tsx).

ðŸ“œ For a deeper dive into this, checkout my blog post
[The State Initializer Pattern](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/the-state-initializer-pattern).

**Real World Projects that use this pattern:**

- [downshift](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift)
- [ReachUI](https://reach.tech)

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](http://advanced-react-patterns-next.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/05.tsx)
- [Final](http://advanced-react-patterns-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/05.tsx)

In this exercise, we want to do two things:

1. Support initializing the `on` state via an `initialOn` option
2. Support resetting the state to that initial value via a `reset` action in our
   reducer (yup, we've graduated from `useState` to `useReducer`).

This will require a number of changes all outlined for you in the exercise file.

You'll know that what you have is working when the toggle starts as "on" and
when you can click the "reset" button to change it from "off" to "on" (and the
tests will verify this is working for you as well).

## Extra Credit

### 1. ðŸ’¯ Support changing the `initialOn`

[Production deploy](http://advanced-react-patterns-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/05.extra-1.tsx)

Actually, we're close, but it's not quite enough. What happens if the user of
your component changes the value of `initialOn` after your component is mounted?
Wouldn't that defeat the purpose of the whole "initial" part of our prop name?
How can you grab hold of the actual initial value and ignore any changes to that
prop?

ðŸ’° Hint, it's not so complicated that you need `useEffect`. You can do this with
`useRef` or `useState`.

## ðŸ¦‰ Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Patterns%20%F0%9F%A4%AF&e=05%3A%20State%20Initializer&em=).
