# Control Props

## 📝 Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/07.md`

## Background

**One liner:** The Control Props pattern allows users to completely control
state values within your component. This differs from the state reducer pattern
in the fact that you can not only change the state changes based on actions
dispatched but you _also_ can trigger state changes from outside the component
or hook as well.

Sometimes, people want to be able to manage the internal state of our component
from the outside. The state reducer allows them to manage what state changes are
made when a state change happens, but sometimes people may want to make state
changes themselves. We can allow them to do this with a feature called "Control
Props."

This concept is basically the same as controlled form elements in React that
you've probably used many times: 📜
https://reactjs.org/docs/forms.html#controlled-components

```javascript
function MyCapitalizedInput() {
  const [capitalizedValue, setCapitalizedValue] = React.useState('')

  return (
    <input
      value={capitalizedValue}
      onChange={e => setCapitalizedValue(e.target.value.toUpperCase())}
    />
  )
}
```

In this case, the "component" that's implemented the "control props" pattern is
the `<input />`. Normally it controls state itself (like if you render
`<input />` by itself with no `value` prop). But once you add the `value` prop,
suddenly the `<input />` takes the back seat and instead makes "suggestions" to
you via the `onChange` prop on the state updates that it would normally make
itself.

This flexibility allows us to change how the state is managed (by capitalizing
the value), and it also allows us to programmatically change the state whenever
we want to, which enables this kind of synchronized input situation:

```javascript
function MyTwoInputs() {
  const [capitalizedValue, setCapitalizedValue] = React.useState('')
  const [lowerCasedValue, setLowerCasedValue] = React.useState('')

  function handleInputChange(e) {
    setCapitalizedValue(e.target.value.toUpperCase())
    setLowerCasedValue(e.target.value.toLowerCase())
  }

  return (
    <>
      <input value={capitalizedValue} onChange={handleInputChange} />
      <input value={lowerCasedValue} onChange={handleInputChange} />
    </>
  )
}
```

**Real World Projects that use this pattern:**

- [downshift](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift)
- [`@reach/listbox`](https://reacttraining.com/reach-ui/listbox)

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](http://advanced-react-patterns-next.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/07.tsx)
- [Final](http://advanced-react-patterns-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/07.tsx)

In this exercise, we've created a `<Toggle />` component which can accept a prop
called `on` and another called `onChange`. These work similar to the `value` and
`onChange` props of `<input />`. Your job is to make those props actually
control the state of `on` and call the `onChange` with the suggested changes.

### 1. 💯 add read only warning

[Production deploy](http://advanced-react-patterns-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/07.extra-1.tsx)

Take a look at the example in `./src/examples/warnings.tsx` (you can pull it up
at
[/isolated/examples/warnings.js](http://localhost:3000/isolated/examples/warnings.tsx)).

Notice the warnings when you click the buttons. You should see the following
warnings all related to controlled inputs:

```
Warning: Failed prop type: You provided a `value` prop to a form field without an `onChange` handler. This will render a read-only field. If the field should be mutable use `defaultValue`. Otherwise, set either `onChange` or `readOnly`.
```

```
Warning: A component is changing an uncontrolled input of type undefined to be controlled. Input elements should not switch from uncontrolled to controlled (or vice versa). Decide between using a controlled or uncontrolled input element for the lifetime of the component. More info: https://fb.me/react-controlled-components
```

```
Warning: A component is changing a controlled input of type undefined to be uncontrolled. Input elements should not switch from controlled to uncontrolled (or vice versa). Decide between using a controlled or uncontrolled input element for the lifetime of the component. More info: https://fb.me/react-controlled-components
```

These runtime warnings are provided to us by React to help us avoid unexpected
behavior/mistakes.

We should issue the same warnings for people who misuse our controlled props:

1. Passing `on` without `onChange`: This would result in a value that's
   read-only. There are times where that's desired, so we can add a `readOnly`
   prop to the `Toggle` component and if that's set to `true` then we don't need
   to warn the dev about this one. You can reproduce this one by removing the
   `onChange` handler from one of the two controlled `<Toggle />` components.
2. Passing a value for `on` and later passing `undefined` or `null`: I honestly
   can't think of a situation where anyone would do this intentionally so it's
   probably a mistake. You can reproduce this in our example by changing
   `setBothOn(false)` to `setBothOn(null)` in the `handleResetClick` callback.
3. Passing `undefined` or `null` for `on` and later passing a value: Similar to
   the second situation, this is most likely a mistake. You can reproduce this
   one in our example by changing `React.useState(false)` to `React.useState()`.

Because the specifics of logging the warning is complicated and not entirely
necessary for your learning (and it really should just be a library you install
anyway) I've given you a hook you can use called `useControlPropWarnings`:

```tsx
import {useControlPropWarnings} from '../utils'
```

You can pop open the `src/utils.tsx` file if you want to get an idea of how it
works.

🐨 So here's what you actually need to do:

1. Import `useControlPropWarnings`
2. Accept a new `readOnly` boolean prop to the `Toggle` component.
3. Call `useControlPropWarnings` with the arguments it needs to know whether to
   log a message and the values to put into that message.

Then make sure you can reproduce all three warnings in the right scenarios.

A real-world component that does this is
[`@reach/listbox`](https://reacttraining.com/reach-ui/listbox/)

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Patterns%20%F0%9F%A4%AF&e=07%3A%20Control%20Props&em=).
